docs(cloud): add load balancing article (#8036)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: umbraco-cloud/optimize-and-maintain-your-site/optimize-performance/load-balancing.md

---
description: >-
  Enable load balancing on Umbraco Cloud to scale an environment across multiple instances for higher throughput and improved availability.
---

# Load Balancing

> Load balancing distributes traffic across multiple instances of the same Umbraco Cloud environment. In this article, you can read about what load balancing on Umbraco Cloud does and when to enable it. The article also covers how scaling works and what to expect during deployments.

Reviewer: Replaced meta-references:

```suggestion
Load balancing distributes traffic across multiple instances of the same Umbraco Cloud environment. Enable it when you need higher throughput, resilience against instance failures, or capacity for traffic spikes.
```

## What load balancing is and why you would enable it

> Load balancing runs an Umbraco Cloud environment on two or more instances that share the same database, media storage, and Redis backplane. Incoming requests are distributed across the instances by the platform.

Author: Not a typo

Enable load balancing when you need:

* **Higher throughput** — more concurrent requests than a single instance can serve.
* **Smoother traffic spikes** — capacity for short-term load increases such as campaigns or product launches.
* **Improved availability** — a single failing instance does not take the environment offline.

> Load balancing is **not** a multi-region failover and does not provide zero-downtime deployments. See [Deployments and restarts](#deployments-and-restarts) below.

Author: Not a typo

## Before you enable load balancing

Confirm your project meets these requirements before turning load balancing on.

{% hint style="warning" %}
Load balancing requires:

* Umbraco CMS **17.0.0 or higher**.
* The project must run in **Umbraco Production Mode**.

> * A plan that supports load balancing — Redis defaults differ per plan, see [Redis backplane and default configuration](#redis-backplane-and-default-configuration) below.

Author: Not a typo

> {% endhint %}

Reviewer: I'd suggest taking the requirements out of the hint. 
We usually use hints for _additional information_, and requirements are essential information, right?

```suggestion
Load balancing requires:

* Umbraco CMS **17.0.0 or higher**.
* The project must run in **Umbraco Production Mode**.
* A plan that supports load balancing — Redis defaults differ per plan, see [Redis backplane and default configuration](#redis-backplane-and-default-configuration) below.
```

Reviewer: Also a couple more notes to this list:

What does "Umbraco Production Mode" mean? Is that a setting that needs to be enabled? 🤔 Would it make sense to add some more information about this?

I'd suggest keeping the third bullet to just "* A Cloud plan that supports load balancing".
The way it's written currently, makes it sound like you have to choose a specific Redis plan.
If you want to keep the link to the section further down, we can do that 🙏

## Scaling modes

{% hint style="info" %}
**Image placeholder**: Portal screenshot of the load-balancing settings panel showing the static and dynamic scaling options. Will be added once the Portal user interface is final.
{% endhint %}

Umbraco Cloud offers two scaling modes. Select the mode that fits your traffic profile.

### Static scaling

Set a fixed instance count for the environment. The count remains the same until you change the value manually.

Choose static scaling when:

* Your traffic is predictable.
* You want full control over running cost.
* You are sizing for a known peak.

### Dynamic scaling

Umbraco Cloud increases or decreases the instance count automatically based on load. The platform adds instances when demand rises and removes them when demand falls.

Choose dynamic scaling when:

* Your traffic is spiky or hard to predict.
* You want capacity to follow demand without manual intervention.
* You want to reduce running cost during low-traffic periods.

> ## Redis backplane and default configuration

Author: Not a typo

> ## Redis backplane and default configuration

Reviewer: A suggestion to make it a little easier to identify the contents of this section

```suggestion
## Redis Configuration by Cloud Plan
```

{% hint style="info" %}
**Image placeholder**: Portal screenshot of the Redis Stock Keeping Unit (SKU) display on the environment settings page. Will be added once the Portal user interface is final.
{% endhint %}

> Each load-balanced environment is provisioned with a managed Redis instance. Redis acts as the SignalR backplane and the distributed cache that keeps state consistent across all running instances.

Author: Not a typo

When you enable load balancing, Umbraco Cloud provisions a Redis Stock Keeping Unit (SKU) by default based on your plan. Higher-tier defaults include High Availability (HA) and a Service Level Agreement (SLA).

| Plan         | Default Redis SKU    |
| ------------ | -------------------- |
| Starter      | Extra Small (no SLA) |
| Standard     | Extra Small+ (HA)    |
| Professional | Small+ (HA)          |

> The Extra Small SKU on the Starter plan does not include an SLA. The Extra Small+ and Small+ defaults on Standard and Professional plans include both an SLA and high availability.

Reviewer: This seems redundant when it's already mentioned above and within the table.

Alternatively, HA and SLA could be included as checkbox columns in the table.

Author: ✅

## Performance and availability

> Load balancing changes how performance and availability behave on an Umbraco Cloud environment. Two behaviors stand out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Load balancing changes how performance and availability behave in an Umbraco Cloud environment. Two behaviors stand out:
```

> Load balancing changes how performance and availability behave on an Umbraco Cloud environment. Two behaviours stand out.

Author: Not a typo

### Logs are split per instance

> Each instance writes a separate log stream. Per-instance logs let you trace requests back to the specific instance that served them. Per-instance logs help when diagnosing problems that affect only one instance in the fleet.

Reviewer: Suggestion to avoid starting two sentence with "Per-instance logs".

```suggestion
Each instance writes a separate log stream. Per-instance logs trace requests to the specific serving instance. This helps diagnose problems affecting only one instance in the fleet.
```

For where to find logs and how to read them, see [Log files](../monitor-and-troubleshoot/resolve-issues-quickly-and-efficiently/log-files.md).

### Capacity and resilience

Multiple instances absorb traffic spikes more effectively than a single instance. If one instance becomes unhealthy, the remaining instances continue to serve traffic while the platform recovers the failed instance.

## Deployments and restarts

{% hint style="warning" %}

> Load balancing does **not** provide rolling updates. When you deploy code or publish content, all instances are restarted. Visitors can see brief unavailability against an instance while the restart completes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Load balancing does **not** provide rolling updates. When you deploy code or publish content, all instances are restarted. Visitors may experience brief downtime while instances restart.
```

{% endhint %}

> Plan deployments and large content publishes during low-traffic windows where possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plan deployments and large content transfers during low-traffic windows where possible.
```

Production mode enforces the `ModelsMode = Nothing` and pre-compiled views requirements at boot — an Umbraco app in Production mode that fails either check throws `BootFailedException`. They are listed separately so you can verify each one against your project before enabling Production mode.
{% endhint %}

## Scaling modes

![Load balancing settings panel with the manual scaling option selected](../../.gitbook/assets/load-balancing-manual-scaling.png)

Umbraco Cloud supports manual scaling. Dynamic scaling, where the platform adjusts the instance count automatically based on load, is planned for a future release.

### Manual scaling

You choose the exact number of instances your environment runs on. The count remains fixed until you change the value.

Choose manual scaling when:

* Your traffic is predictable.
* You want full control over running cost.
* You are sizing for a known peak.

{% hint style="warning" %}
Load-balanced environments currently have sticky sessions enabled. Each visitor is routed to the same instance for the duration of their session, which limits how evenly traffic is distributed across instances.
{% endhint %}

## Cache Configuration by Cloud Plan

> Load balancing is available on dedicated plans from **Standard Dedicated 1** and up. It is not available on Starter, Standard (shared), Standard Dedicated 1, or shared Professional plans. If you need load balancing on a smaller plan, contact Umbraco Support to discuss upgrade paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Load balancing is available on dedicated plans from **Standard Dedicated 2** and up. It is not available on Starter, Standard (shared), Standard Dedicated 1, or shared Professional plans. If you need load balancing on a smaller plan, contact Umbraco Support to discuss upgrade paths.
```

Umbraco CMS uses Microsoft's HybridCache for its distributed cache. See the [HybridCacheOptions reference](https://docs.umbraco.com/umbraco-cms/reference/configuration/cache-settings#hybridcacheoptions) for configuration details.

When you enable load balancing, Umbraco Cloud selects a Redis Stock Keeping Unit (SKU) automatically based on your plan. All eligible plans include High Availability (HA) and a Service Level Agreement (SLA) on the Redis instance.

| Plan                 | Default Redis SKU | High Availability |
| -------------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- |
| Standard Dedicated 2 | Extra Small+      | ✅                 |
| Pro Dedicated 1      | Small+            | ✅                 |
| Pro Dedicated 2      | Small+            | ✅                 |
| Pro Dedicated 3      | Small+            | ✅                 |

For the full list of available Redis SKUs and how to choose one, see [Cache Configuration](cache-configuration.md).

## Performance and availability

Load balancing changes how performance and availability behave in an Umbraco Cloud environment. Two behaviors stand out:

### Logs are split per instance

> Each instance writes a separate log stream. Per-instance logs trace requests to the specific serving instance. This helps diagnose problems affecting only one instance in the fleet.

Reviewer: Removed "fleet" as it seems like jargon.

```suggestion
Each instance writes a separate log stream. Per-instance logs trace requests to the specific serving instance. This helps diagnose problems affecting only one instance.
```

Load balancing is **not** a multi-region failover and does not provide zero-downtime deployments. See [Deployments and restarts](#deployments-and-restarts) below.

## Prerequisites

The Umbraco Cloud Portal checks these prerequisites automatically under `Project -> Configuration -> Load Balancing`. You cannot enable load balancing until every prerequisite passes.

> | Prerequisite | What it is | How to meet it |

Reviewer: Let's do "Learn more" instead of "How to meet it", as the information in the column doesn't actually tell the user how to meet the prerequisite.

| --- | --- | --- |

> | Plan supports dedicated servers | Load balancing runs on dedicated infrastructure, available from the **Standard Dedicated 2** plan and up. | [Dedicated Resources](../../build-and-customize-your-solution/set-up-your-project/project-settings/dedicated-resources.md) |

Reviewer: How about "**Standard Dedicated 2 or higher**" instead of "Plan supports dedicated servers?

Author: Let me update this, to be on any Professional Plan with a Dedicated Server

> | Environment alone on a dedicated server | Load balancing scales every site on the server. The environment must be the only one on its dedicated server. | [Dedicated Resources](../../build-and-customize-your-solution/set-up-your-project/project-settings/dedicated-resources.md) |

Reviewer: How about "**Private Dedicated server**" instead of "Environment alone on a dedicated server"?

Author: Wording "Private Dedicated server" might not be the correct terminology and hints as something technically different than "Environment alone on a dedicated server".

| Umbraco CMS **17.4.2** or higher | The base Umbraco CMS package meets the minimum supported version. | [Minor Upgrades](../manage-product-upgrades/product-upgrades/minor-upgrades.md) |

> | Umbraco.Cloud.Cms **17.1.3** or higher | The Umbraco Cloud CMS package meets the minimum supported version. | [Product Dependencies](../manage-product-upgrades/product-upgrades/product-dependencies.md) |

Reviewer: The "Product Dependencies" page doesn't hold any information about the Umbraco.Cloud.CMS package. I don't think we have anything about that package in the docs, actually.
Might be better to link this one to the "Release notes" where the latest released version of this package will be listed: https://docs.umbraco.com/umbraco-cloud/release-notes/overview-2026

Author: Hmmm 🤔 .
Cloud Release notes just doesn't feel right to me, because that dependency is not really tracked as releases as such or may, or may not have its own release notes.

I am updating the links to point to the Minor Upgrades pages instead.

Reviewer: As far as I know, they've started to add the Umbraco.Cloud.Cms package to the release notes 🙏 
There's currently an open PR that includes something: https://github.com/umbraco/UmbracoDocs/pull/8173

In any case, I think linking to "Product Dependencies" is misleading, as there is no info about the package there 🤔

Author: I've updated the link to point to minor upgrades, like the rest of the links. I think that is inline with the rest of the package upgrades.

| Umbraco.Deploy.Cloud **17.1.0** or higher | The Umbraco Deploy Cloud package meets the minimum supported version. | [Manual Upgrade of Deploy](../manage-product-upgrades/product-upgrades/manual-upgrades/manual-upgrade-deploy.md) |

> | Runtime mode set to Production | `Umbraco:CMS:Runtime:Mode` is set to `Production`. | [Runtime Modes](https://docs.umbraco.com/umbraco-cms/fundamentals/setup/server-setup/runtime-modes#production-mode) |

Reviewer: How about **"Runtime mode: Production"** instead of "Runtime mode set to Production"?

Author: I think I am good with text we currently have.  Pre-requite -> Prosa Description not a technical term. Technicalities found in the next column, and under the link in the table

Reviewer: I'm not entirely sure I understand what this means: Pre-requite -> Prosa Description ?

| Hosting debug disabled | `Umbraco:CMS:Hosting:Debug` is set to `false`, as required in production. | [Hosting Settings](https://docs.umbraco.com/umbraco-cms/develop-with-umbraco/configuration/hostingsettings) |

> | ModelsBuilder mode set to Nothing | `Umbraco:CMS:ModelsBuilder:ModelsMode` is set to `Nothing`, so models are pre-compiled. | [ModelsBuilder Settings](https://docs.umbraco.com/umbraco-cms/reference/configuration/modelsbuildersettings) |

Reviewer: How about **"ModelsBuilder mode: Nothing"** instead of "ModelsBuilder mode set to Nothing"?

Author: I think I am good with text we currently have.  Pre-requite -> Prosa Description not a technical term. Technicalities found in the next column, and under the link in the table
